# Early-Suicide-Prevention-Depression-Level-Prediction-Using-Machine-Learning-and-Deep-Learning-Techniques

Depression is a crucial factor for deciding to suicide. However, few works have been done on depression analysis using the Bengali language based on social media data such as Facebook. In this paper, we propose a depression detection model for Facebook users using Logistic Regression and LSTM. This work aims to analyze the status updates from Facebook users within 2–3 years and evaluate them to detect whether the person is depressed or not. We collected data from 100 users’ profiles from Facebook, containing on average 30 posts from each user, and proposed BenFED dataset. The proposed system considers sixteen emotional factors related to depression. Based on these emotions, Facebook users’ statuses are labeled as four types, e.g., no, mild, moderate, and severe for determining the level of depression. We compared our proposed approach with other state-of-the-art approaches. It is revealed that our proposed approach outperformed most of the compared techniques for detecting emotions, depression levels, and depression statuses.

#  BenFED: Proposed Dataset

We need a vast amount of data for depression analysis. Unfortunately, there is no 114 standard dataset for depression analysis in the Bengali language. As Bangladeshi 115 people are more active and willing to share their daily thoughts on Facebook, this 116 is a good platform to get the desired datasets. We, firstly, identify the potential 117 individuals from different Facebook groups, pages, and profiles where they ask for 118 mental health support. Some people hide their identity in Facebook groups while 119 asking for help. In that case, we carefully engaged in talks with them on a very 120 personal level through chat. Upon explaining the nature of our works and the value 121 it brings to the table, we humbly inquire whether they take an interest in disclosing 122 their original Facebook profile for our research study. We also exchanged views in as 123 many cases as possible going down extremely individual levels to rate our classified 124 “emotion” and “depression” levels. The dataset is labeled manually by four different 125 persons, having domain knowledge, and is further verified by two experts in the 126 mental health domain. 127 We collected 100 user profiles manually from Facebook, consisting of 3000 posts, 128 on an average of 30 posts per user, and introduced BenFED (Bengali Facebook 129 Emotion Depression) dataset, for determining emotion and depression levels. Four 130 human crawlers were assigned to collect the dataset. Identifying emotion is a great 131 way to classify the potential depressed person. Therefore, we took 16 emotions 132 for easily classifying depression levels. Based on the emotion, we group these into 133 four depression levels such as no (e.g., joy, approval, love, amusement, surprise, 134 neutral); mild (e.g., disgust, disapproval, anger, confusion); moderate (e.g., nervous- 135 ness, remorse, embarrassment, fear, disappointment), severe (e.g., sadness). For 136 suicide prevention, these four labels have been used for predicting depression levels.

# Publication

[Early Suicide Prevention: Depression Level Prediction Using Machine Learning and Deep Learning Techniques for Bangladeshi Facebook Users](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-19-2445-3_52)
